MON-3920: add runbook for PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures (#225)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures.md

# PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures` alert is triggered when there is a constant
increase in failures with `LIST/WATCH` requests to the Kubernetes API during Prometheus target
discovery.

## Impact

This may prevent Prometheus from adding, updating, or deleting targets effectively.

## Diagnosis

Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used
for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined
projects by viewing the alert message's `namespace` label: the namespace for
default cluster monitoring is `openshift-monitoring` and the namespace for
user workload monitoring is `openshift-user-workload-monitoring`.

## Mitigation

To gain further insight, review the logs of the affected Prometheus instance:

   ```shell
   $ NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

>    $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -c prometheus -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus'

Reviewer: FYI, this command only output 20-line logs, maybe the error is not in the output, maybe
`$ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -c prometheus ${prometheus_pod}`
is better?

Reviewer: I meant the command only output 20-line logs, the error maybe not in the 20-line logs
`oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -c prometheus -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus' --tail=-1` will show all logs

Author: You're right, I didn't know about that, it's really hidden in the `--tail` description.
Some other commands with selectors in other runbooks would need to be adjusted.

   ```

The issue may arise from one or both of the following scenarios:

### Insufficient RBAC Permissions for Prometheus

In this scenario, Prometheus has been tasked to discover targets in a specified namespace, likely
through `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resources, yet Prometheus lacks the necessary RBAC
permissions to query `Service`, `Endpoints`, `Pod`, and other related resources where the targets 
are defined, the following log messages may be observed:

```
ts=2024-11-13T07:09:51.190Z caller=klog.go:108 level=warn component=k8s_client_runtime
func=Warningf msg="github.com/prometheus/prometheus/discovery/kubernetes/kubernetes.go:554:
failed to list *v1.Endpoints: endpoints is forbidden:
User \"system:serviceaccount:openshift-monitoring:prometheus-k8s\" cannot list resource
\"endpoints\" in API group \"\" in the namespace \"foo\""
```

To rectify this issue, ensure Prometheus is granted the necessary RBAC permissions as detailed in

> the following guide: [Configuring Prometheus to scrape metrics].

Reviewer 2: Any reason to not just have the link here?

Reviewer 2: yeah I get it. Not the biggest fan of working around it this way, but what can you do. I'll see if there is a lint exception. lgtm in the mean time.

Author: It's legitimate markdown though that's already used in other places (https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopenshift%2Frunbooks+%22%5D%3A+%22&type=code), for me it's better than using an exception...

Reviewer 2: Oh that actually gets rendered. TIL, sorry for the noise.

> the following guide: [Configuring Prometheus to scrape metrics].

Reviewer 3: IIUC the permission issue can only happen for platform Prometheus and it's either a misconfiguration from the certified operator (product bug) or a user-defined service/pod monitor deployed in a plaform namespace (unsupported config). User-defined Prometheus should have full permissions by default.

The other cause could be a partial/complete outage of the Kubernetes API.

Author: Yes, `User-defined Prometheus should have full permissions by default` but maybe there is a problem with deploying those needed RBAC, and not excluding UWM from the runbook may help debugging that.

This could also help SREs maybe on some setups (hypershift maybe? Not sure about that) where the default UWM RBAC are maybe tweaked (the default cluster role isn't used or sth).
I think we can keep it as generic as it is.

I'll try to reproduce and add the `Kube API outage` case.

# PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures` alert is triggered when `LIST/WATCH`
requests to the Kubernetes API start failing during Prometheus target discovery.

## Impact

This might prevent Prometheus from adding, updating, or deleting targets effectively.

## Diagnosis

Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used

> for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for platform monitoring or for the instance that monitors user workloads
```

Author: we use those wordings elsewhere https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopenshift%2Frunbooks%20%22default%20cluster%20monitoring%22&type=code and https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopenshift%2Frunbooks+%22user-defined%22&type=code
(better stay consistent as long as nobody complains about them)

Reviewer 5: To put in my two cents,  in the official docs we would use "default platform" or "platform", but if nobody complained, it is not a big issue, it is still clear what we mean here :+1:

> Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used
> for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined

Reviewer 5: For slightly easier use of words:
```suggestion
Determine if the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used
for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined
```

> projects by viewing the alert message's `namespace` label. The namespace for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
by checking the `namespace` label in  the alert message . The namespace for
```

Author: same wording uses in other runbooks https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Aopenshift%2Frunbooks+%22projects+by+viewing+the+alert+message%22&type=code

> default cluster monitoring is `openshift-monitoring` and the namespace for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
platform monitoring is `openshift-monitoring` and the namespace for
```

Author: https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/pull/225#discussion_r1973370789

user workload monitoring is `openshift-user-workload-monitoring`.

To gather more information, review the logs of the affected Prometheus instance:

   ```shell
   # NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'
   $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -c prometheus -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus' --tail=-1
   ```

## Mitigation

The issue might arise for multiple reasons:

### Insufficient RBAC Permissions for Prometheus

In this scenario, Prometheus has been tasked to discover targets in a specified
namespace, typically through `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resources. However,
Prometheus does not have the necessary RBAC permissions to query `Service`, `Endpoints`,
`Pod`, and other related resources where the targets are defined. Logs similar to
the following one can be observed:

```text
... failed to list *v1.Endpoints: endpoints is forbidden:
User \"system:serviceaccount:openshift-monitoring:prometheus-k8s\" cannot list resource
\"endpoints\" in API group \"\" in the namespace \"foo\""
```

To resolve this issue, follow one of these steps:

> - For default cluster monitoring (`openshift-monitoring`): Follow

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- For platform monitoring (`openshift-monitoring`): Follow
```

Author: https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/pull/225#discussion_r1973370789

> - For default cluster monitoring (`openshift-monitoring`): Follow

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- For default cluster monitoring (`openshift-monitoring`), follow
```

[Configuring Prometheus to scrape metrics] to ensure Prometheus is granted
the necessary RBAC permissions.

> - For user workload monitoring (`openshift-user-workload-monitoring`): Typically,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- For user workload monitoring (`openshift-user-workload-monitoring`): Typically
```

> - For user workload monitoring (`openshift-user-workload-monitoring`): Typically,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- For user workload monitoring (`openshift-user-workload-monitoring`), typically,
```

> Prometheus for user workload monitoring has cluster-wide permissions. Ensure

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Prometheus deployed for user workload monitoring has cluster-wide permissions. Ensure
```

> that CMO has no issues deploying the underlying resources to obtain these

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that cluster-monitoring-operator (CMO) has no issues while deploying the underlying resources to obtain these
```

Reviewer 5: To stay consistent with the official docs: "Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO)"

permissions. Running the `oc get co monitoring -o yaml` command should provide hints.

### Connectivity Issue

> Prometheus might not be able to reach the apiserver. In such cases, logs similar

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Prometheus might not be able to reach the API server. In such cases, logs similar
```

to the following ones can be seen (examples are not exhaustive):

```text
... failed to list *v1.Endpoints: Get
\"https://A.B.C.D:443/api/v1/namespaces/openshift-foo/endpoints?limit=500&resourceVersion=0\":
dial tcp A.B.C.D:443: i/o timeout"
```

```text
... failed to list *v1.Endpoints: Get
\"https://foo-apiserver:6443/api/v1/namespaces/openshift-console/endpoints?limit=500&
resourceVersion=0\": dial tcp: lookup foo-apiserver on A.B.C.D:53: no such host"
```

> Please refer to the relevant resources for debugging such problems.

Reviewer 4: I think we should clarify here which resources to refer for more clarity

Author: I wanted to have that as a placeholder for relevant links to be added. I'll remove it

> Please refer to the relevant resources for debugging such problems.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Refer to the relevant resources to debug such problems.
```

---

If you cannot resolve the issue, log in to the
[Customer Portal](https://access.redhat.com) and open a support case,

> attaching the artifacts gathered during the diagnosis procedure.

Reviewer 4: nit: adding the link to diagnosis procedure would be good to make it clear

Author: this same wording is used in many other places

Reviewer 4: Agree, but I felt it's more clear if we provide the link correctly. But that can be done later for all runbooks

# PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures` alert is triggered when there is a constant

> increase in failures with `LIST/WATCH` requests to the Kubernetes API during Prometheus

Author: The former.

> The `PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures` alert is triggered when there is a constant
> increase in failures with `LIST/WATCH` requests to the Kubernetes API during Prometheus

Reviewer 5: Then,  for an additional clarity, I would rephrase it as follows: 

```suggestion
The `PrometheusKubernetesListWatchFailures` alert is triggered when `LIST/WATCH` requests to the Kubernetes API start failing during Prometheus
```

> increase in failures with `LIST/WATCH` requests to the Kubernetes API during Prometheus

Reviewer 5: But that is just a small suggestion, otherwise LGTM!

target discovery.

## Impact

This may prevent Prometheus from adding, updating, or deleting targets effectively.

## Diagnosis

Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used
for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined
projects by viewing the alert message's `namespace` label: the namespace for
default cluster monitoring is `openshift-monitoring` and the namespace for
user workload monitoring is `openshift-user-workload-monitoring`.

To gain further insight, review the logs of the affected Prometheus instance:

   ```shell
   # NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

>    $ oc -n  logs -c prometheus -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus' --tail=-1

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -c prometheus -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus' --tail=-1
```

Author: nice catch

   ```

## Mitigation

The issue may arise for many reasons:

### Insufficient RBAC Permissions for Prometheus

> In this scenario, Prometheus has been tasked to discover targets in a specified
> namespace, likely through `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resources, yet
> Prometheus lacks the necessary RBAC permissions to query `Service`, `Endpoints`,
> `Pod`, and other related resources where the targets  are defined, logs like the
> following may be observed:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this scenario, Prometheus has been tasked to discover targets in a specified
namespace, typically through `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resources. However,
Prometheus does not have the necessary RBAC permissions to query `Service`, `Endpoints`,
`Pod`, and other related resources where the targets are defined. Logs similar to the
following one can be observed:
```

```text
... failed to list *v1.Endpoints: endpoints is forbidden:
User \"system:serviceaccount:openshift-monitoring:prometheus-k8s\" cannot list resource
\"endpoints\" in API group \"\" in the namespace \"foo\""
```

> To rectify this issue:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To resolve this issue, follow one of these steps:
```

- For default cluster monitoring (`openshift-monitoring`): Follow
[Configuring Prometheus to scrape metrics] to ensure Prometheus is granted
the necessary RBAC permissions.

- For user workload monitoring (`openshift-user-workload-monitoring`): Normally,
Prometheus for user workload monitoring has cluster-wide permissions. Ensure
that CMO has no issues deploying the underlying resources to obtain these
permissions. Running `oc get co monitoring -o yaml` should provide hints.

### Connectivity Issue

> Prometheus may not be able to reach the apiserver. In such cases, logs like the
> following may be seen (examples are not exhaustive):

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Prometheus might not be able to reach the apiserver. In such cases, logs similar to the
following ones can be seen (examples are not exhaustive):
```
